alligator 1.0.0
===============

:date: 2020-10-28

This marks the official 1.0.0 release of ``alligator``.

Major changes include:

    * Added scheduled & delayed task support
    * An official SQLite backend
    * Removed Beanstalk support
    * Upgraded to ``boto3``
    * General modernization

This also marks the beginning of API stability for the 1.X.X series of
releases. While new features & bugfixes will continue to be added, no
public method signatures will be changed in **backward-incompatible** ways.

This means you should be able to upgrade between versions within the 1.X.X
series without having to worry about ``alligator``'s API changing & breaking
code that depends on it.

Lastly, there are no changes from the ``1.0.0-beta-2`` build.

What follows are the *combined* release notes for the prior
1.0.0-beta-X & 1.0.0-alpha-X releases.

Enjoy & happy queuing!


Features
--------

* Added official SQLite support. (SHA: `7ff4236`)
* Added delayed/scheduled task support. (SHA: `da33d1a`, `a9f2d58`, &
  `9266d20`)
* Added ``poetry`` support. (SHA: `2643b40`)
* Removed Beanstalk support. (SHA: `368db30`)

    `Note:` This is due to the lack of Python 3 support in the ``beanstalkc``
    library. If this changes in the future, we'll re-evaluate adding it back
    in.

* Updated the SQS backend to `boto3`. (SHA: `ee80d69` & `c6fd671`)


Bugfixes
--------

* Revised how logging is setup by the `Worker`. (SHA: `d52a877`)
* Bugfixes for failed tasks & consistent pop behavior. (SHA: `9d91309`)
* Fixed several bugs around delayed/scheduled tasks. (SHA: `2e51867`)
* Fixed the SQS backend to delete messages & trimming delays to an int.
  (SHA: `cd6c4e2`)
* Fixed the executable permission on ``latergator``. (SHA: `2d176a4`)
* Formatted all the code with `black`. (SHA: `3cff2cc`)
* Changed ``Task.async`` to ``Task.is_async``, due to ``async`` being a
  reserved word in modern Python 3. (SHA: `bf98511`)
* Updated all dependencies to more current versions. (SHA: `1d368e3`)
* Fixed the Redis backend's tests. (SHA: `e793aa9`)
* Fixed the worker process to correctly exit during testing. (SHA: `9b7b486`)


Documentation
-------------

* Added more to the Migration Guide. (SHA: `6e48da4`)
* Fixed the Redis & SQS backend docstrings. (SHA: `4fe15e7`)
* Added 1.0.0-alpha-1 release notes. (SHA: `e83c391`)
* Added the start of the "Migration to 1.0" guide. (SHA: `cbab984`)
* Switched the docstring style. (SHA: `e5a6a40`)
* Added delayed/scheduled tasks documentation. (SHA: `87c0165`)
* Various documentation fixes. (SHA: `2459956`)
